Package ‘ggplot2’
March 2, 2013
Type Package
Title An implementation of the Grammar of Graphics
Version 0.9.3.1
Author Hadley Wickham <h.wickham@gmail.com>, Winston Chang <winston@stdout.org>
Maintainer Hadley Wickham <h.wickham@gmail.com>
Description An implementation of the grammar of graphics in R. It
combines the advantages of both base and lattice graphics:
conditioning and shared axes are handled automatically, and you
can still build up a plot step by step from multiple data
sources. It also implements a sophisticated multidimensional
conditioning system and a consistent interface to map data to
aesthetic attributes. See the ggplot2 website for more information, documentation and examples.
Depends R (>= 2.14), stats, methods
Imports plyr (>= 1.7.1), digest, grid, gtable (>= 0.1.1), reshape2,scales (>= 0.2.3), proto, MASS
Suggests quantreg, Hmisc, mapproj, maps, hexbin, maptools, multcomp,nlme, testthat
Enhances sp
License GPL-2
URL http://had.co.nz/ggplot2/
LazyData true
Collate ’aaa-.r’ ’aaa-constants.r’ ’aes-colour-fill-alpha.r’’aes-linetype-sizeshape.
r’ ’aes.r’ ’annotation.r’ ’bench.r’’coord-.r’ ’coord-cartesian-.r’ ’coord-fixed.r’ ’coordflip.
r’’coord-map.r’ ’coord-munch.r’ ’coord-polar.r’’coord-transform.r’ ’facet-.r’ ’facet-grid-
.r’ ’facet-labels.r’’facet-layout.r’ ’facet-locate.r’ ’facet-null.r’’facet-viewports.r’ ’facetwrap.
r’ ’fortify-lm.r’’fortify-map.r’ ’fortify-spatial.r’ ’fortify.r’ ’geom-.r’’geom-abline.r’ ’geombar-.
r’ ’geom-bar-histogram.r’’geom-bin2d.r’ ’geom-blank.r’ ’geom-boxplot.r’’geomcrossbar.
r’ ’geom-defaults.r’ ’geom-dotplot.r’’geom-error.r’ ’geom-errorh.r’ ’geomfreqpoly.
r’ ’geom-hex.r’’geom-hline.r’ ’geom-linerange.r’ ’geom-polygon.r’ ’geom-map.r’’geom-path-.r’ ’geom-path-contour.r’ ’geom-path-density2d.r’’geom-path-line.r’ ’geompath-
step.r’ ’geom-point-.r’’geom-point-jitter.r’ ’geom-pointrange.r’ ’geom-quantile.r’’geomrect.
r’ ’geom-ribbon-.r’ ’geom-ribbon-density.r’’geom-rug.r’ ’geom-segment.r’ ’geomsmooth.
r’ ’geom-text.r’’geom-tile.r’ ’geom-violin.r’ ’geom-vline.r’ ’ggplot2.r’’grobabsolute.
r’ ’grob-dotstack.r’ ’grob-null.r’’guide-colorbar.r’ ’guide-legend.r’ ’guides-.r’ ’guidesaxis.
r’’guides-grid.r’ ’labels.r’ ’layer.r’ ’limits.r’ ’matrix.r’’panel.r’ ’plot-build.r’ ’plotconstruction.
r’ ’plot-last.r’’plot-render.r’ ’plot.r’ ’position-.r’ ’position-collide.r’’positiondodge.
r’ ’position-fill.r’ ’position-identity.r’’position-jitter.r’ ’position-stack.r’ ’quickplot.
r’ ’save.r’’scale-.r’ ’scale-alpha.r’ ’scale-area.r’ ’scale-brewer.r’’scale-continuous.r’ ’scaledate.
r’ ’scale-datetime.r’’scale-discrete-.r’ ’scale-gradient.r’ ’scale-gradient2.r’’scalegradientn.
r’ ’scale-grey.r’ ’scale-hue.r’’scale-identity.r’ ’scale-linetype.r’ ’scale-manual.r’’scaleshape.
r’ ’scale-size.r’ ’scales-.r’ ’stat-.r’’stat-summary-2d.r’ ’stat-summary-hex.r’ ’statbin.
r’’stat-bin2d.r’ ’stat-binhex.r’ ’stat-boxplot.r’’stat-contour.r’ ’stat-density-2d.r’ ’statdensity.
r’’stat-bindot.r’ ’stat-function.r’ ’stat-identity.r’ ’stat-qq.r’’stat-quantile.r’ ’stat-smoothmethods.
r’ ’stat-smooth.r’’stat-spoke.r’ ’stat-sum.r’ ’stat-summary.r’ ’stat-unique.r’’statvline.
r’ ’stat-ydensity.r’ ’stat-ecdf.r’ ’summary.r’’templates.r’ ’theme-defaults.r’ ’themeelements.
r’ ’theme.r’’utilities-break.r’ ’utilities-grid.r’ ’utilities-layer.r’’utilitiesmatrix.
r’ ’utilities-resolution.r’’utilities-table.r’ ’utilities.r’ ’xxx-digest.r’ ’zxx.r’’geomraster.
r’ ’annotation-raster.r’ ’annotation-map.r’’autoplot.r’ ’zzz.r’ ’fortifymultcomp.
r’ ’annotation-custom.r’’aes-group-order.r’ ’aes-position.r’ ’translate-qplotbase.
r’’translate-qplot-ggplot.r’ ’translate-qplot-gpl.r’’translate-qplot-lattice.r’ ’annotationlogticks.
r’’utilities-help.r’

NeedsCompilation no
Repository CRAN
Date/Publication 2013-03-02 15:56:56
R topics documented:
+.gg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
add_theme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
aes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
aes_all . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
aes_auto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
aes_colour_fill_alpha . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
aes_group_order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
aes_linetype_size_shape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
aes_position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
aes_string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
annotate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
annotation_custom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
annotation_logticks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
annotation_map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
annotation_raster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
autoplot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
borders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
calc_element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
coord_cartesian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
coord_fixed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
coord_flip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
coord_map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
coord_polar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
coord_trans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
cut_interval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
cut_number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
diamonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
discrete_scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
economics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
element_blank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
element_line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
element_rect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
element_text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
expand_limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
facet_grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
facet_null . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
facet_wrap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
fortify . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
fortify-multcomp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
fortify.lm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
fortify.map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
fortify.sp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
geom_abline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
geom_area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
geom_bar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
geom_bin2d . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
geom_blank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
geom_boxplot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
geom_contour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
geom_crossbar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
geom_density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
geom_density2d . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
geom_dotplot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
geom_errorbar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
geom_errorbarh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
geom_freqpoly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
geom_hex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
geom_histogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
geom_hline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
geom_jitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
geom_line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
geom_linerange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
geom_map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
geom_path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
geom_point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
geom_pointrange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83